MRSA是methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus的縮寫，即「抗
藥性金黃葡萄球菌」。這是一種對某些抗生素有抗藥性的細菌。
常規抗生素無法殺死有抗藥性的細菌。
很多人皮膚表面沾染細菌，但並不造成危害。但是，有時這些細
菌可透過皮膚創口侵入體內，並引起感染。如果引起感染的細菌
具有抗藥性，例如MRSA，則更難治療。這種感染也可能很嚴重，
尤其是治療不當或深處感染時，例如肺部感染。

MRSA引起的皮膚感染表症不盡相同。不要自行判斷自己是否已感
染MRSA。如果您有如下皮膚感染症狀，應給醫生打電話：
•  看上去像蜘蛛咬傷的潰瘍 - 但MRSA並非由蜘蛛咬傷而引起。
•  大面積、紅色、有痛感的皮下腫塊。
•  腫脹、發熱、流膿或流血的創傷或潰瘍。
•  充滿液體的水泡。

是的。觸踫他人的患處或受感染的物品，例如毛巾，便有可能 
感染MRSA。如果皮膚上有創傷，這些細菌可能侵入您的體內， 
並引起感染。遵守本資料頁左側的步驟，有助於降低感染MRSA的
風險。
感染MRSA者可協助防止將此病傳染給別人。皮膚患處應用繃帶蓋
住，四周用膠布黏貼，直至癒合為止。如果患處無法覆蓋或液體
從繃帶處漏出，那麼在患處癒合之前，不應上班、上學、去幼稚
園、健身房、游泳池或水療池。

是的。MRSA須由醫師來治療。治療方法包括排出患處的液體，服
用某類抗生素，或使用特殊肥皂或油膏。請務必遵循醫囑。
已接受醫師治療MRSA感染者，如果有新症狀，患處不癒合或惡
化，或治癒後又復發，則應再次就醫。

請致電當地健康部門或瀏覽網站： 
www.doh.wa.gov/Topics/Antibiotics/MRSA.htm

•  經常用肥皂和清水洗手 - 至少搓
洗雙手15秒鐘，並用力擦洗手指
間隙和指甲周圍。
•  在觸摸自己的眼睛、鼻子、嘴、
生殖器、暗瘡、癤瘡、潰瘍或紅
疹之前或之後，必須洗手。
•  如果沒有肥皂和清水，可用 
酒精含量至少60%的潔手劑清潔
雙手。
•  應仔細護理割傷、擦傷和潰瘍
處。用肥皂和清水清洗。保持患
處乾燥，並用繃帶覆蓋，四周用
膠布黏貼，直至癒合為止。
•  不要共用毛巾、剃鬚刀、固體肥
皂、牙刷和其他個人用品。
•  不要觸摸他人的傷口、潰瘍和紅
疹。不要觸踫曾經接觸過他人患
處的物品，例如毛巾。
•  運動、健身器材和衣物每次使用
後都應進行清潔處理或清洗。
•  祇能服用根據醫師處方而獲得
的抗生素。如果醫師為您開了處
方，一定要堅持把整瓶藥服完，
因為最後幾粒藥可殺死最頑固的
細菌。

DOH 130-046 April 2009 Chinese
此 文 件 還 備 有 其 他 版 本 格 式 ， 可 供 殘 障 人 士 索 
取。請打電話索取，電話號碼是1-800-525-0127
（TDD/TTY專線：1-800-833-6388）。

Skin Infections from MRSA
often pronounced mersa or M-R-S-A

How can I protect myself from 
getting MRSA?
•	 Wash your hands often	with	
soap	and	water—rub	your	hands	
together	for	at	least	15	seconds	
and	scrub	between	fingers	and	
around	nails.
•	 Wash your hands before and 
after you	touch	your	eyes,	nose,	
mouth,	genitals,	pimples,	boils,	
sores	or	rashes.
•	 Use a hand gel	with	at	least	60%	
alcohol	to	sanitize	your	hands	if		
soap	and	water	are	not	available.
•	 Take good care of cuts, scrapes, 
and sores.	Clean	them	with	soap	
and	water.	Keep	them	dry	and	
covered	with	a	bandage,	taped		
on	all	sides,	until	they	are	healed.
•	 Don’t share towels,	razors,	bar	
soap,	toothbrushes	or	other	
personal	items.
•	 Don’t touch	other	people’s	cuts,	
sores	or	rashes.	Don’t	touch	
anything	that	has	touched	other	
people’s	infections,	like	a	towel.
•	 Clean sports equipment, gym 
equipment and clothing	after		
each	use.
•	 Only take antibiotics when  
they are prescribed to you by  
a doctor. If	you	get	a	prescription,	
always	finish	the	whole	bottle—
the	last	few	pills	kill	the	toughest	
germs.

What is MRSA?
MRSA stands for methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus. It is a type  
of bacteria that are resistant to certain types of antibiotics. When bacteria 
are resistant, it means that they can’t be killed by common antibiotics.
Many people have bacteria on their skin that don’t cause any harm. 
However, sometimes these bacteria can get inside the body through a  
break in the skin and cause an infection. Infections caused by resistant 
bacteria, like MRSA, are more difficult to treat. They can also be very 
serious, especially if they are not treated properly or happen in deeper  
areas of the body like the lungs.       

What does MRSA look like?
Skin infections from MRSA don’t all look the same. Don’t try to decide  
on your own if you have a MRSA infection. Call your doctor if you  
have signs of a skin infection such as: 
• A sore that looks like a spider bite—MRSA is not caused by spiders.
• A large, red, painful bump under the skin.
• A cut or sore that is swollen, hot, and oozing pus or blood.
• Blisters filled with fluid.

Is MRSA contagious?
Yes. You can pick up MRSA bacteria by touching someone’s infection or 
anything that comes in contact with that infection, like a towel. If you 
have a break in your skin, these bacteria could get in your body and cause 
an infection. You can lower your risk of getting an infection from MRSA 
by following the steps on the left side of this fact sheet. 
People who have MRSA can help prevent it from spreading to others.  
Skin infections should be covered with a bandage, taped on all sides, until 
they are healed. If the infection can’t be covered, or if fluid leaks from the 
bandage, you should not go to work, school, child care, gyms, pools or 
spas until the infection has healed. 

Can MRSA be treated?
Yes. MRSA infections should always be treated by a doctor. Treatment 
may include draining the infection, taking certain antibiotics, or using 
special soap or ointment. It is very important that you follow your doctor’s 
instructions. 
People already being treated for a MRSA infection should see a doctor if 
they have new symptoms, if the infection doesn’t heal or gets worse, or  
if the infection goes away and then comes back.

DOH 130-046 January 2009

For persons with disabilities, this document is available 
on request in other formats. To submit a request, please 
call 1-800-525-0127 (TDD/TTY 1-800-833-6388).

For more information on MRSA
Call your local health department or visit: 
www.doh.wa.gov/Topics/Antibiotics/MRSA.htm

Dear Colleague,

The Washington State Department of Health (DOH) provides print-ready files 
(PDFs) of health education materials. To ensure that the original quality of the piece 
is maintained, please read and follow the instructions below and the specifications 
included for professional printing.

• Use the latest version. DOH materials are developed using the most current 
information available, are checked for clinical accuracy, and are field tested 
with the intended audience to ensure they are clear and readable. DOH 
programs make periodic revisions to educational materials, so please check 
this web site to be sure you have the latest version. DOH assumes no 
responsibility for the use of this material or for any errors or omissions.

• Do not alter. We are providing this artwork with the understanding that 
it will be printed without alterations and copies will be free to the public. 
Do not edit the text or use illustrations or photographs for other purposes 
without first contacting us. Please do not alter or remove the DOH logo, 
publication number or revision date. If you want to use a part of this 
publication for other purposes, contact the Office of Health Promotion first.

• For quality reproduction: Low resolution PDF files are intended for black 
and white or color desktop printers. They work best if you are making only 
one or two copies. High resolution PDF files are intended for reproducing 
large quantities and are set up for use by professional offset print shops.  
The high resolution files also include detailed printing specifications. Please 
match them as closely as possible and insist on the best possible quality for  
all reproductions.

If you have questions, contact:
Office of Health Promotion
P.O. Box 47833 Olympia, WA  98504-7833 
(360) 236-3736

Sincerely,
Health Education Resource Exchange Web Team

