 
Lyme Disease

PUBLIC HEALTH 
FACT SHEET 
 
Massachusetts Department of Public Health, 305 South Street, Jamaica Plain, MA 02130 
What is Lyme disease? 
Lyme disease is caused by bacteria (germs) that are spread by tiny, infected deer ticks.  Both people and animals 
can have Lyme disease. 
Where do cases of Lyme disease occur? 
In the United States, Lyme disease most commonly occurs in the Northeast and mid-Atlantic regions and in the 
upper Midwest.  In Massachusetts, Lyme disease occurs throughout the state. 
How is Lyme disease spread? 
Lyme disease is spread by the bite of an infected deer tick.  The tick usually must be attached to a person for at least 
24 hours before it can spread the germ.  Deer ticks in Massachusetts can also carry the germs that cause babesiosis 
and human granulocytic anaplasmosis (also known as human granulocytic ehrlichiosis).  Deer ticks are capable of 
spreading more than one type of germ in a single bite. 
When can I get Lyme disease? 
Lyme disease can occur during any time of the year.  The bacteria that cause Lyme disease are spread by infected 
deer ticks.  Young ticks (nymphs) are most active during the warm weather months between May and July.  Adult 
ticks are most active during the fall and spring but may also be out searching for a host any time that winter 
temperatures are above freezing. 
How soon do symptoms of Lyme disease appear after a tick bite? 
Symptoms of early Lyme disease, described below, usually begin to appear from 3 to 30 days after being bitten 
by an infected tick.  If untreated, symptoms of late Lyme disease may occur from weeks to years after the initial 
infection. 
What are the symptoms of Lyme disease? 
Early stage (days to weeks): The most common early symptom is a rash (erythema migrans) where the tick was 
attached.  It often, but not always, starts as a small red area that spreads outward, clearing up in the center so it 
looks like a donut.  Flu-like symptoms, such as fever, headache, stiff neck, sore and aching muscles and joints, 
fatigue and swollen glands may also occur. 
 
Even though these symptoms may go away by themselves, without medical treatment, some people will get the 
rash again in other places on their bodies, and many will experience more serious problems.  Treatment during 
the early stage prevents later, more serious problems. 
 
Later stages (weeks to years): If untreated, people with Lyme disease can develop late-stage symptoms even if 
they never had a rash.  The joints, nervous system and heart are most commonly affected.  
•  About 60% of people with untreated Lyme disease get arthritis in their knees, elbows and/or wrists.  The 
arthritis can move from joint to joint and become chronic.  
•  Many people who don’t get treatment develop nervous system problems.  These problems include meningitis 
(an inflammation of the membranes covering the brain and spinal cord), facial weakness (Bell’s palsy) or other 
problems with nerves of the head, and weakness or pain (or both) in the hands, arms, feet and/or legs.  These 
symptoms can last for months, often shifting between mild and severe.  
•  The heart also can be affected in Lyme disease, with slowing down of the heart rate and fainting.  The effect on 
the heart can be early or late. 

 
Is there treatment for Lyme disease? 
People who are diagnosed with Lyme disease can be treated with antibiotics.  Prompt treatment during the early 
stage of the disease prevents later, more serious problems. 
 
What can I do to lower my chances of getting Lyme disease, or any other 
disease, from ticks?  
Prevention begins with you!  Take steps to reduce your chances of being bitten by any tick.  Ticks are most active 
during warm weather, generally late spring through fall.  However, ticks can be out any time that temperatures are 
above freezing.  Ticks cling to vegetation and are most numerous in brushy, wooded or grassy habitats.  They are not 
found on open, sandy beaches, but may be found in grassy dune areas.  When you are outside in an area likely to 
have ticks (e.g. brushy, wooded or grassy places), follow these simple steps to protect yourself and your loved ones: 
•  Use a repellent with DEET (the chemical N-N-diethyl-meta-toluamide) or permethrin according to the 
instructions given on the product label.  DEET products should not be used on infants under two months of age 
and should be used in concentrations of 30% or less on older children.  Permethrin products are intended for use 
on items such as clothing, shoes, bed nets and camping gear, and should not be applied to skin.   
•  Wear long, light-colored pants tucked into your socks or boots, and a long-sleeved shirt.  This may be difficult to 
do when the weather is hot, but it will help keep ticks away from your skin and help you spot a tick on your 
clothing faster. 
•  Stay on cleared trails when walking or hiking, avoiding the edge habitat where ticks are likely to be. 
•  Talk to your veterinarian about tick control options (tick collars, repellents) for your pets. 
•  More information on choosing a repellent and how to use repellents safely is included in the MDPH Tick 
Repellents fact sheet at www.mass.gov/dph/tick.  If you can’t go online, contact the MDPH at (617) 983-6800 for 
a hard copy. 

 

Did you know? 
You don’t have to be a hiker on Cape Cod to worry about ticks.  In Massachusetts, you may be 
bitten in your own backyard.  There are lots of things you can do around your own backyard to 
make it less inviting for ticks!  Visit the MDPH Tickborne Disease Website at 
www.mass.gov/dph/tick for suggestions. 

After spending time in an area likely to have ticks, check yourself, your children and pets for ticks. 
Young ticks, called nymphs, are the size of a poppy seed.  Adult deer ticks are the size of a sesame seed.  Both 
nymph and adult deer ticks can spread the bacteria that cause Lyme disease; however, nymphs are of more concern.  
They are aggressive feeders and so tiny that it can be difficult to see them on the body, unless you are looking 
carefully.  When doing a tick check, remember that ticks like places that are warm and moist.  Always check the 
back of the knees, armpits, groin, scalp, back of the neck and behind the ears.  If you find a tick attached to your 
body, remove it as soon as possible using a fine-point tweezers.  Do not squeeze or twist the tick’s body, but grasp it 
close to your skin and pull straight out with steady pressure. 
 
Know the symptoms of Lyme disease as described in this fact sheet.  If you have been someplace likely to have 
ticks and you develop symptoms of Lyme disease, or any other disease carried by ticks, see your health care 
provider right away. 
 
Where can I get more information? 
•  Your doctor, nurse, or health care clinic or your local board of health (listed in the telephone directory under local 
government)  
•  The Massachusetts Department of Public Health (MDPH), Division of Epidemiology and Immunization at (617) 
983-6800 or toll-free at (888) 658-2850, or on the MDPH Tickborne Diseases website at  www.mass.gov/dph/tick   
•   Health effects of pesticides, MDPH, Center for Environmental Health at 617-624-5757                                                          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Updated: March 2011 

