QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS ABOUT  
Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA)

What is MRSA? 
MRSA is a kind of bacteria that is resistant to some kinds of antibiotics. To understand MRSA it is 
helpful to learn about Staphylococcus aureus bacteria, often called “staph,” because MRSA is a kind 
of staph.

What are staph?
Staph are bacteria commonly carried on the skin or in the nose of healthy people. About 25-30% 
of the U.S. population carry staph on their bodies at any time. 

Do staph always make people sick?
No. Many people carry staph in their nose or on their skin for a period of time and do not know 
they are carrying them. They do not have skin infections. They do not have any other signs or 
symptoms of illness. This is called “colonization.” 

Sometimes, though, staph can cause an infection, especially pimples, boils and other problems 
with the skin. These infections often contain pus, and may feel itchy and warm.  Occasionally, 
staph cause more serious infections. 

How are staph spread? 
Staph are spread by direct skin-to-skin contact, such as shaking hands, wrestling, or other direct 
contact with the skin of another person. Staph are also spread by contact with items that have been 
touched by people with staph, like towels shared after bathing and drying off, or shared athletic 
equipment in the gym or on the ﬁeld. 

Staph infections start when staph get into a cut, scrape or other break in the skin. People who have 
skin infections—painful, swollen pimples, boils, and rashes, for example—should be very careful to 
avoid spreading their infection to others. 

Is MRSA different from other staph? 
Yes.  MRSA is different from other staph because it cannot be treated with some antibiotics. When 
antibiotics are needed to treat a MRSA infection, the right antibiotic must be used. If the right 
antibiotic is not used, the treatment may not work.

MRSA is just like other staph in almost every other way:  

•  MRSA can be carried on the skin or in the nose of healthy people, and usually not cause an 
infection or make them sick. 
•  It can cause minor skin infections that go away without any special medical treatment. 
•  It is spread the same way as other staph.
•  The symptoms are the same as other staph infections. 

MRSA is sometimes said as a single word, “mersa,” or by saying all four letters, “M-R-S-A”  

A
S
R
M

Massachusetts  
Department of Public Health

What are the symptoms of an infection caused by staph? 
Pimples, rashes, pus-ﬁlled boils, especially when warm, painful, red or swollen, can mean that 
you have a staph or MRSA skin infection.

Occasionally, staph can also cause more serious problems such as surgical wound infections, 
bloodstream infections and pneumonia. The symptoms could include high fever, swelling, heat 
and pain around a wound, headache, fatigue and others. 

What should I do if I think I have a staph skin infection? 
Keep the area clean and dry. See your doctor, especially if the infection is large, painful, warm to 
the touch, or does not heal by itself.

How will my doctor know if I have a MRSA infection? 
The only way to tell the difference between MRSA and other staph infections is with lab tests.  
Lab tests will also help your doctor decide which antibiotic should be used for treatment, if 
antibiotic treatment is necessary.

Your doctor will usually take a sample on a swab (like a Q-tip) from the infected area. The 
sample will be sent to a laboratory to see if the infection is caused by staph. Blood and other 
body ﬂuids can also be tested for staph. 

How are MRSA infections treated? 
Most MRSA skin infections are treated by good wound and skin care: keeping the area clean 
and dry, washing your hands after caring for the area, carefully disposing of any bandages, and 
allowing your body to heal. 

Sometimes treatment requires the use of antibiotics. Lab tests help your doctor decide which 
antibiotic should be used for treatment, if antibiotic treatment is necessary. If antibiotics are 
prescribed, it is important to use the medication as directed unless your doctor tells you to stop. 
If the infection has not improved within a few days after seeing your doctor, contact your doctor 
again. 

How can I prevent a staph infection? 
•  Regular handwashing is the best way to prevent getting and spreading staph, including 
MRSA. Keep your hands clean by washing them frequently with soap and warm water or use 
an alcohol-based hand sanitizer, especially after direct contact with another person’s skin. 
•   Keep cuts and scrapes clean and covered with a bandage until they have healed. 
•   Avoid contact with other people’s wounds or bandages. 
•   Avoid sharing personal items such as towels, washcloths, toothbrushes and razors. Sharing 
these items may transfer staph from one person to another. 
•   Keep your skin healthy, and avoid getting dry, cracked skin, especially during the winter. 
Healthy skin helps to keep the staph on the surface of your skin from causing an infection 
underneath your skin. 
•   Contact your doctor if you have a skin infection that does not improve. 

For more information about MRSA,  
visit the MDPH website at www.mass.gov/dph 

A
S
R
M

Massachusetts  
Department of Public Health
October 2006

