PUBLIC HEALTH 
 
Meningococcal 
FACT SHEET 
Disease 
Massachusetts Department of Public Health, 305 South Street, Jamaica Plain, MA 02130 

What is meningococcal disease? 
Meningococcal disease occurs with infections due to the bacterium, Neisseria meningitidis.  There are two 
major types of meningococcal disease:  Meningococcal meningitis and meningococcemia.  Meningococcal 
meningitis is an infection of the tissue (called the “meninges”) that surrounds the brain and spinal cord. 
Meningococcemia is an infection of the blood and may also involve other parts of the body.  
What are Neisseria meningitidis?  
Neisseria meningitidis are bacteria that may be found normally in people’s throats and noses. About 5 to 15% 
of people carry these bacteria and do not get sick from them. These people may be called “carriers.” Carriers 
only have bacteria for a short time. Usually, the bacteria go away and these people may have increased 
resistance to infection in the future. In rare cases, the bacteria may get into the blood and go to the tissue 
surrounding the spinal cord and brain, causing severe illness. 
How are the bacteria spread? 
The bacteria are spread from person-to-person through saliva (spit). You must be in close contact with an 
infected person’s saliva in order for the bacteria to spread. Close contact includes activities such as kissing, 
sharing water bottles, sharing eating/drinking utensils, or sharing cigarettes with someone who is infected; or 
being within 3-6 feet of someone who is infected and is coughing or sneezing.  
How is meningococcal disease diagnosed? 
Persons showing signs and symptoms of illness are diagnosed by growing the bacteria from their spinal fluid 
(meningitis) or blood (meningococcemia) in the laboratory. It may take up to 72 hours to have test results. 
Sometimes an earlier diagnosis can be made by looking at a person’s spinal fluid under a microscope. Often a 
preliminary diagnosis is made on the basis of signs and symptoms before laboratory results are available. 
What are the signs and symptoms of illness? 
Meningococcal meningitis: 
Signs and symptoms of meningitis include sudden onset of high fever, stiff neck, headache, nausea, vomiting, 
and/or mental confusion. Changes in behavior such as confusion, sleepiness, and being hard to wake up are 
important symptoms of this illness. A rash may be present, often involving the hands and feet. In babies, the 
only signs of this illness may be acting more tired than usual, acting more irritable than usual, and eating less 
than usual. Babies with meningitis will usually have a fever, but this is not a reliable sign of illness. Anyone 
who has these symptoms should be seen by a health care provider right away. 
Meningococcemia:  

Signs and symptoms of meningococcemia include a sudden onset of fever, chills, and feeling unusually weak 
and tired. A rash may be present, often on the hands and feet. Anyone who has these symptoms should be 
seen by a health care provider right away. 
How are these illnesses treated? 
Antibiotics are used to treat people with both meningococcal meningitis and meningococcemia. People who 
have had close contact with the sick person any time during the two weeks before she/he became ill may also 
need to take antibiotics. Preventive treatment of all close contacts should be started as soon as possible but 
ideally within 24 hours of identifying the case. 

 

 

 
Why do close contacts of a sick person need to be treated? 
Close contacts of a person who has meningococcal disease are treated with antibiotics because the disease-
causing bacteria may be spread from the infected person to other people through contact with the saliva (spit) 
of the infected person. The antibiotics will kill the bacteria and prevent illness. 
Is there a vaccine to protect me from getting sick? 
Yes, there are currently 2 types of vaccines available that protect against 4 of the most common of the 13 
serogroups (subgroups) of N. meningitidis that cause serious disease. Meningococcal polysaccharide vaccine 
is approved for use in those 2 years of age and older.  There are 2 licensed meningococcal conjugate vaccines.  
Menactra® is approved for use in those 9 months – 55 years of age.  Menveo® is proved for use in those 2 to 
55 years of age. Meningococcal vaccines are thought to provide protection for approximately 5 years.  

Meningococcal vaccine is recommended for children 11-12 years of age.  Now, students 16-18 years of age 
should receive a booster dose or their first dose if they have not yet been vaccinated.  College freshman and 
other newly enrolled college students living in dormitories who are not yet vaccinated are also recommended 
to receive meningococcal vaccine. Meningococcal vaccine and booster doses are recommended for high-risk 
groups including anyone with a damaged spleen or whose spleen has been removed, those with persistent 
complement component deficiency (an inherited immune disorder), HIV infection, those traveling to 
countries where meningococcal disease is very common, microbiologists and people who may have been 
exposed to meningococcal disease during an outbreak.  
 
Massachusetts law requires newly enrolled full-time students attending colleges and schools with grades 9-12, 
who will be living in a dormitory or other congregate housing, licensed or approved by the school or college, 
to receive meningococcal vaccine or sign a waiver declining vaccination. More information about this 
requirement may be found in the MDPH document entitled “Information about Meningococcal Disease and 
Vaccination and Waiver for Students at Residential Schools and Colleges.”  
What should I do if I have had contact with a person who has meningococcal 
disease? 
If you have had close contact with a person who has been diagnosed with meningococcal disease you should 
call your health care provider and get an antibiotic. If you have had contact with an ill person, but have not 
had close contact, you should be aware of the symptoms of illness and contact your health care provider right 
away if you have any of these symptoms. 
Are there times when I would not have to take antibiotics after close 
contact with a sick person with meningitis? 
Yes. Meningitis can be caused by many different types of germs, including other bacteria and viruses. Only 
certain types of meningitis require treatment of the infected person’s close contacts. If you have questions 
about meningitis or your exposure to a sick person, contact your health care provider. 
 Where can I get more information? 
•  Your health care provider  
•  The Massachusetts Department of Public Health, Division of Epidemiology and Immunization at  
(617) 983-6800 or toll free at (888) 658-2850 or on the MDPH website at http://www.mass.gov/dph 
•  Your local health department (listed in the phone book under government)                Updated: August 2011 

