PUBLIC HEALTH 
 
Mumps 
FACT SHEET 
Massachusetts Department of Public Health, 305 South Street, Jamaica Plain, MA 02130 

What is mumps? 
Mumps is a contagious disease caused by a virus.  The most common symptom is swelling of the cheeks and 
jaw due to inflammation of one or both of the saliva glands near the ear and back of the jaw.  However, up to 
half of the people with mumps may not have enough swelling to show.  Other symptoms include fever, 
headache, stiff neck and loss of appetite.  Mumps is more common in children than in adults, but it can cause 
serious problems at any age. 
 
Is mumps dangerous? 
Mumps is usually a mild disease, however, it can cause complications.  In more than 1 out of 3 men, mumps 
causes swollen testicles.  In 1 out of 20 women, mumps causes swollen ovaries.  This swelling can cause 
sterility, although this is rare.   
 
Mumps sometimes causes problems in other organs, including the heart, pancreas, and joints, which can lead 
to permanent damage.  The most serious problems caused by mumps are inflammation of the thin membrane 
that covers the brain and spinal cord (meningitis) and inflammation of the brain itself (encephalitis). 
Meningitis occurs in 15% of people who have mumps and is more common in adults than in children.  
Deafness may occur in 1 out of 20,000 people who have mumps. 
 
Mumps infection during the first trimester of pregnancy may increase the risk of miscarriage. 
 
How is mumps spread? 
The virus that causes mumps lives in the nose, mouth and throat, and is sprayed into the air when an infected 
person sneezes, coughs or talks.  Other people nearby can then inhale the virus.  Touching a tissue or sharing 
a cup used by someone with mumps can also spread the virus.  People with mumps are usually contagious 
from 2 days before until 5 days after their glands start swelling.  Symptoms most often appear 2 - 3 weeks 
after a person is exposed.   
 
Who gets mumps? 
(cid:131)  Anyone who never had mumps and has never been vaccinated. 
(cid:131) 
Infants younger than 12 months old, because they are too young to be vaccinated. 
(cid:131)  A small percentage of vaccinated children and adults who may not have responded well to the vaccine. 
 How is mumps diagnosed? 
Mumps is often diagnosed by its symptoms, but this is not always reliable.  A blood test can be used to 
diagnose mumps, but this test is not always definitive.  Sometimes multiple blood tests taken over time are 
needed to diagnose mumps.  A swab taken from the inside of the cheek may also help diagnose the disease. 
 
How can you prevent mumps? 
(cid:131)  Mumps vaccine is usually given in a shot called MMR, which protects against measles, mumps and 
rubella.  There are now many fewer cases of these three diseases because children get the MMR vaccine.  
Protect your children by having them vaccinated when they are 12 - 15 months old, and again when they 
are about to enter kindergarten.   
(cid:131)  State regulations require certain groups to be vaccinated against mumps.  Child care workers and children 
in child care and preschool need to have one dose of mumps vaccine.  Students in kindergarten,         

 
grades 1 – 12 and in college need two doses of MMR vaccine for school entry.  A blood test that proves 
immunity can also be used to fulfill this requirement for all groups. 
(cid:131)  Adults born in or after 1957 should have at least 1 dose of MMR. 
(cid:131)  People in high risk groups such as health care workers (paid, unpaid and volunteer), health science 
students and international travelers should have 2 doses of MMR, regardless of year of birth. 
(cid:131)  Women who plan to have children and are not immune should get MMR at least 4 weeks before getting 
pregnant. 
(cid:131)  People with mumps should be kept away from people who are not immune until they are well again.  
State regulations require anyone who catches mumps to be isolated for 5 days after the onset of gland 
swelling.  That means they must be kept away from public places like day care centers, school and work. 
 
Is MMR vaccine safe? 
Yes.  It is safe for most people.  However, a vaccine, like other medicines, can cause side effects in some 
people.  The MMR vaccine can cause fever, mild rash, temporary pain or stiffness of the joints.  More severe 
problems, such as seizures, bleeding problems or allergic reactions are very rare.  Getting MMR vaccine is 
much safer than getting mumps, and most people do not have any problems with the vaccine. 
 
Who should not get MMR vaccine? 
(cid:131)  People who have serious allergies to gelatin, the drug neomycin, or a previous dose of the vaccine. 
(cid:131)  Pregnant women or women who are trying to get pregnant within 4 weeks should not get MMR vaccine 
 
until after they deliver their babies. 
(cid:131)  People with cancer, HIV, or other problems or treatments that weaken the immune system should check 
  with their doctor or nurse before getting vaccinated. 
(cid:131)  People who have recently had a transfusion or were given other blood products should check with their 
 
doctor or nurse before getting vaccinated.  
(cid:131)  People with high fevers should not be vaccinated until after the fever and other symptoms are gone.   
 
Should healthcare workers be extra careful about mumps? 
Yes.  Healthcare workers who are not immune to mumps can become infected and spread the virus to their 
coworkers and patients.  That is why it is required that all health care workers who are exposed to mumps and 
have no record of mumps vaccination or whose blood tests show that they are not immune stay out of work 
from the 12th day through the 26th day after being exposed to the disease.  Healthcare workers should have 
proof of immunity to mumps, either through vaccination or blood test. 
 
Where can I get more information? 
(cid:131)  Your doctor, nurse or clinic, or your local board of health (listed in the phone book under local 
government). 
(cid:131)  The Massachusetts Department of Public Health, Immunization Program (617) 983-6800 or toll-free at 
(888) 658-2850 or on the MDPH Website at www.state.ma.us/dph/. 
(cid:131)  Boston providers and residents my also call the Boston Public Health Commission at (617) 534-5611. 
(cid:131)  CDC National Immunization Information Hotline: 
(cid:131)  English: 1-800-232-2522 or Spanish: 1-800-232-0233 (Mon – Fri, 8am – 11pm) 
(cid:131)  TTY:     1-800-243-7889 (Mon – Fri, 10am – 10pm) 

 

 
 

 2011 

