 
 
Severe Acute 
 
 
PUBLIC HEALTH 
Respiratory 
FACT SHEET 
Syndrome (SARS)
Massachusetts Department of Public Health, 305 South Street, Jamaica Plain, MA 02130 

What is SARS? 
SARS stands for Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome. It is an infection caused by a virus. People with SARS 
have a fever, cough and breathing problems. The disease was first reported among people in Guangdong 
Province (China), Hanoi (Vietnam), and Hong Kong.  
How is SARS spread?  
SARS is spread by close contact between people. Close contact is defined as having cared for, having lived 
with or having direct contact with the respiratory secretions and/or body fluids of a person with SARS. 
Public health experts think that SARS is most likely spread when someone sick with the disease sneezes or 
coughs droplets into the air and another person breathes in the droplets. People are infectious when they are 
sick. It is possible that SARS can be also be transmitted more broadly through the air or by touching objects 
that have become contaminated with the virus that causes SARS.  
What are the symptoms of SARS? 
In general, SARS begins with a fever greater than 100.4°F [>38.0°C]. Other early symptoms may include 
headache, an overall feeling of discomfort, body aches, or mild respiratory symptoms (coughing, sneezing, or 
shortness of breath). After 2 to 7 days, symptoms may worsen significantly. Some SARS patients may 
develop a severe dry cough and have trouble breathing. 
Who is at risk for SARS? 
•  People who have recently traveled to a country where community spread of SARS has been documented. 
•  People who have had direct close contact with a person who is sick with SARS. For example: people 
living with a SARS patient; or health care workers who did not wear a mask while taking care of a SARS 
patient. In the United States, there is no indication that SARS is being spread at this time. Public health 
officials continue to monitor this situation very closely. 
What you should do to protect yourself? 
•  Avoid close contact with people who have returned within 10 days from a high-risk area, but only if they 
are currently ill with symptoms consistent with SARS infection. (There is no need to avoid recent 
travelers who have no symptoms of SARS.) 
•  Avoid close contact with a person who may have SARS by wearing a mask. Or, the infected person can 
wear a mask as this can reduce the number of droplets coughed into the air. 
•  Wash your hands often with soap and warm water—this can help prevent the spread of SARS and many 
other viruses and bacteria. Alcohol hand gels and rubs may also be used to wash and decontaminate the 
hands. 
•  Do not share food, drinks, or eating utensils with other people, especially if they are ill. This measure is 
important for preventing the spread of SARS and other germs. 

 

Should you avoid contact with co-workers or classmates who traveled 
recently? 
At this point there is no evidence that a person without symptoms may transmit SARS to other people 
and it is very unlikely to be possible. Persons without symptoms who have traveled to high-risk areas do not 
need to be isolated or quarantined. Respiratory symptoms in a person without a recent history of travel to a 
high-risk area or close contact with a SARS patient are most likely caused by other common respiratory 
illnesses. Respiratory illness is very common, so most respiratory illness, even in people returning from parts 
of the world with SARS risk, will not be SARS. 
If someone is exposed to SARS, how long could it take them to become 
sick? 
The incubation period for SARS is typically 2 to 7 days. (The “incubation period” means the time it takes for 
symptoms to begin after being exposed to a disease-causing germ.) 
Because isolated reports have suggested the SARS incubation period could be as long as 10 days, anyone who 
has traveled to a high-risk area should monitor themselves for signs of illness (fever greater than 100.4°F 
[>38.0°C] and one or more respiratory symptoms) for ten days upon return. 
If you think you or someone in your family might have SARS (because of fever, with cough and trouble 
breathing and with an exposure to a ill person with symptoms consistent with SARS), you should 
consult a doctor as soon as possible. The ill person should cover his or her mouth and nose with tissues 
when coughing or sneezing, and avoid close contact with other people.  

Where can I get more information? 

•  Visit the SARS website of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) at 
www.cdc.gov/ncidod/sars/  
•  Visit the World Health Organization website at www.who.int 
•  Call the CDC hotline at: (888) 246-2675 English — (888) 246-2857 Español — (866) 874-2646 TTY 
•  Call the Massachusetts Department of Public Health (MDPH), Division of Epidemiology and 
Immunization at (617) 983-6800 or toll-free at (888) 658-2850 or on the MDPH website at 
http://www.mass.gov/dph 

 

Revised May 9, 2003 

