 

 

Cytomegalovirus (CMV) Infection 

Date: 

Dear Parent or Guardian,  

Your child may have been exposed to cytomegalovirus (CMV) while at child care.  
 
What causes CMV?  
CMV is a viral infection very common in young children.  
 
What are the symptoms of CMV?  
Most people with CMV infection have no symptoms.  Some people may experience fever, sore throat, 
tiredness, and swollen glands.  People who have been infected with CMV develop lifelong antibodies to 
the virus; that is, they usually don’t get it more than once. 
 
How serious is CMV? 
CMV usually doesn’t harm children who become infected.  For people with weakened immune systems, 
however, CMV can be more serious and a health care provider should be consulted.  CMV may also 
cause problems for the fetus during pregnancy.  Pregnant women exposed to CMV should contact their 
health care provider. 
 
How does a person get CMV?  
CMV is spread through contact with infected body fluids, such as saliva, urine, and blood.   
 
When is a person with CMV contagious?  
People with CMV are contagious as long as the virus is in their body secretions, which can be for 
months.  
 
How can I help prevent the spread of CMV? 
•  Wash hands well and often with soap and water, especially after changing diapers or using the 
toilet.    
•  Cover coughs and sneezes and put used tissues into a trash can.   
•  Clean, rinse, and sanitize toys regularly at child care and after contact with saliva.   
•  Prevent sharing of food, drinks, and personal items that may touch the mouth, such as eating 
utensils, toothbrushes, or towels.  
•  Avoid kissing children on the mouth. 
 
 
If you are pregnant, discuss CMV with your health care provider. 
 
What is the treatment for CMV? 
Healthy children and adults recover from CMV infection without any problems and treatment is not 
necessary.  Treatment for CMV infection is usually needed only for people with weakened immune 
systems. 
 
If my child develops CMV, must s/he stay away from child care? 
No, as long as s/he does not have any other symptoms that would require exclusion. 
 

 

 

Child Care Health Program 03.08 

