Influenza Vaccine
What You Need to Know

(Flu Vaccine, Live, 
Intranasal)
2013-2014

Many Vaccine Information Statements are 
available in Spanish and other languages.  
See www.immunize.org/vis
Hojas de Informacián Sobre Vacunas están 
disponibles en Español y en muchos otros 
idiomas. Visite www.immunize.org/vis

injection with a needle. This vaccine is described in a 
separate Vaccine Information Statement. 
Flu vaccine is recommended every year. Children 6 
months through 8 years of age should get two doses the 
first year they get vaccinated.
Flu viruses are always changing. Each year ’s flu vaccine 
is made to protect from viruses that are most likely to 
cause disease that year. While flu vaccine cannot prevent 
all cases of flu, it is our best defense against the disease. 
LAIV protects against 4 different influenza viruses.
It takes about 2 weeks for protection to develop after 
the vaccination, and protection lasts several months to a 
year. 
Some illnesses that are not caused by influenza virus are 
often mistaken for flu. Flu vaccine will not prevent these 
illnesses. It can only prevent influenza.
LAIV may be given to people 2 through 49 years of 
age, who are not pregnant. It may safely be given at the 
same time as other vaccines.
LAIV does not contain thimerosal or other preservatives.
 Some people should not get 
  3 
this vaccine
Tell the person who gives you the vaccine:
•  If you have any severe (life-threatening) allergies, 
including an allergy to eggs. If you ever had a life-
threatening allergic reaction after a dose of flu vaccine, 
or have a severe allergy to any part of this vaccine, you 
should not get a dose. 
•  If you ever had Guillain-Barré Syndrome (a severe 
paralyzing illness, also called GBS). Some people 
with a history of GBS should not get this vaccine. This 
should be discussed with your doctor.
•  If you have gotten any other vaccines in the past 
4 weeks, or if you are not feeling well. They might 
suggest waiting. But you should come back.

  1  Why get vaccinated?
Influenza (“flu”) is a contagious disease that spreads 
around the United States every winter, usually between 
October and May. 
Flu is caused by the influenza virus, and can be spread 
by coughing, sneezing, and close contact.
Anyone can get flu, but the risk of getting flu is highest 
among children. Symptoms come on suddenly and may 
last several days. They can include:
•  fever/chills
•  sore throat
•  muscle aches
•  fatigue
•  cough
•  headache
•  runny or stuffy nose
Flu can make some people much sicker than others. 
These people include young children, people 65 and 
older, pregnant women, and people with certain health 
conditions—such as heart, lung or kidney disease, or 
a weakened immune system. Flu vaccine is especially 
important for these people, and anyone in close contact 
with them.
Flu can also lead to pneumonia, and make existing 
medical conditions worse. It can cause diarrhea and 
seizures in children. 
Each year thousands of people in the United States die 
from flu, and many more are hospitalized. 
Flu vaccine is the best protection we have from flu 
and its complications. Flu vaccine also helps prevent 
spreading flu from person to person.
 Live, attenuated flu 
  2 
vaccine — LAIV, Nasal Spray
There are two types of influenza vaccine: 
You are getting a live, attenuated influenza vaccine 
(called LAIV), which is sprayed into the nose. 
“Attenuated” means weakened. The viruses in the 
vaccine have been weakened so they can’t make you 
sick.
A different vaccine, the “flu shot,” is an inactivated 
vaccine (not containing live virus). It is given by 

VACCINE INFORMATION STATEMENT•  You should get the flu shot instead of the nasal 
spray if you:
- are pregnant
- have a weakened immune system
- have certain long-term health problems
- are a young child with asthma or wheezing problems
- are a child or adolescent on long-term aspirin therapy
- have close contact with someone who needs special 
care for an extremely weakened immune system
- are younger than 2 or older than 49 years. (Children 
6 months and older can get the flu shot. Children 
younger than 6 months can’t get either vaccine.)
The person giving you the vaccine can give you more 
information.
  4  Risks of a vaccine reaction
With a vaccine, like any medicine, there is a chance of 
side effects. These are usually mild and go away on their 
own.
Serious side effects are also possible, but are very rare. 
LAIV is made from weakened virus and does not cause 
flu.
Mild problems that have been reported following 
LAIV: 
Children and adolescents 2-17 years of age:
•  runny nose, nasal congestion or cough
•  fever
•  headache and muscle aches
•  wheezing
•  abdominal pain or occasional vomiting or diarrhea
Adults 18-49 years of age:
•  runny nose or nasal congestion
•  sore throat
•  cough, chills, tiredness/weakness
•  headache
Severe problems that could follow LAIV:
•  A severe allergic reaction could occur after any 
vaccine (estimated less than 1 in a million doses).
The safety of vaccines is always being monitored. For 
more information, visit: www.cdc.gov/vaccinesafety/

 What if there is a serious 
  5 
reaction?
What should I look for?
•  Look for anything that concerns you, such as signs of 
a severe allergic reaction, very high fever, or behavior 
changes. 
 
Signs of a severe allergic reaction can include hives, 
swelling of the face and throat, difficulty breathing, 
a fast heartbeat, dizziness, and weakness. These 
would start a few minutes to a few hours after the 
vaccination.
What should I do?
•  If you think it is a severe allergic reaction or other 
emergency that can’t wait, call 9-1-1 or get the person 
to the nearest hospital. Otherwise, call your doctor.
•  Afterward, the reaction should be reported to the 
Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS). 
Your doctor might file this report, or you can  
do it yourself through the VAERS web site at  
www.vaers.hhs.gov, or by calling 1-800-822-7967.
VAERS is only for reporting reactions. They do not give 
medical advice.
  6 
 The National Vaccine Injury 
Compensation Program
The National Vaccine Injury Compensation Program 
(VICP) is a federal program that was created to 
compensate people who may have been injured by 
certain vaccines.
Persons who believe they may have been injured by a 
vaccine can learn about the program and about filing a 
claim by calling 1-800-338-2382 or visiting the VICP 
website at www.hrsa.gov/vaccinecompensation.
  7  How can I learn more?
•  Ask your doctor.
•  Call your local or state health department.
•  Contact the Centers for Disease Control and  
Prevention (CDC): 
- Call 1-800-232-4636 (1-800-CDC-INFO) or 
- Visit CDC’s website at www.cdc.gov/flu

  Vaccine Information Statement (Interim)
 Live Attenuated Influenza Vaccine
Office Use Only
07/26/2013
  42 U.S.C. § 300aa-26

