 
 
Molluscum Contagiosum 

Date: 

Dear Parent or Guardian,  

Your child may have been exposed to molluscum contagiosum while at child care. 
What is molluscum contagiosum?  
Molluscum contagiosum is a skin infection caused by a virus. 
 
What are the symptoms of molluscum contagiosum?  
Molluscum contagiosum appears as small bumps on the skin.  The bumps often have a waxy, white or 
pinkish look and a small pit in the center.  A person may have only a few bumps, or many. The bumps 
spread to different parts of body by scratching a bump and touching another part of the body. Without 
treatment, the bumps usually go away after a few months, although they can last up to 2 years. 
 
How serious is molluscum contagiosum? 
Molluscum contagiosum is contagious, but harmless.  The bumps do not leave scars. 
 
How does a person get molluscum contagiosum?  
Someone usually gets molluscum contagiosum from direct contact with a bump on an infected person.  
A towel or other object used by an infected person may also spread the virus 
 
How long does it take to come down with molluscum contagiosum after a person is exposed? 
Bumps appear weeks to months after exposure to the virus. 
 
When is a person with molluscum contagiosum contagious?  
It is unknown how long a person with molluscum contagiosum is contagious, but it may be as long as the 
skin bumps are present. 
 
How can I help prevent the spread of molluscum contagiosum? 
•  Wash hands well and often with soap and water, especially after touching bumps.    
•  Clean, rinse, and sanitize toys regularly at child care. 
•  Prevent sharing of unwashed clothing, sheets, washcloths, or towels. 
•  Wash clothing, sheets, washcloths, and towels of person with molluscum contagiosum in hot 
water. 
•  Keep infected area(s) covered with clothing or bandage(s) while at child care. 
•  Keep fingernails short (clip at home) to decrease spread by scratching. 
 
What is the treatment for molluscum contagiosum? 
To relieve itching, try applying a small plastic bag of ice wrapped in a paper towel. There is no way to kill 
the virus that causes molluscum contagiosum, but it usually goes away on its own.  The bumps may be 
removed by a health care provider using surgery or medicines, if desired.  
 
 
If my child develops molluscum contagiosum, must s/he stay away from child care? 
No, as long as s/he does not have any other symptoms that would require exclusion.   
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

Child Care Health Program 0308 

