 

FACT SHEET 
 
A c u t e  R a d i a t i o n  S y n d r om e  
 
Radiation sickness, known as acute radiation syndrome (ARS), is a serious illness that occurs when the 
entire body (or most of it) receives a high dose of radiation, usually over a short period of time. Many 
survivors of the Hiroshima and Nagasaki atomic bombs in the 1940s and many of the firefighters who first 
responded after the Chernobyl Nuclear Power Plant accident in 1986 became ill with ARS. 
 
People exposed to radiation will get ARS only if: 
 

•  The radiation dose was high (doses from medical procedures such as chest X-rays are too low to 
cause ARS; however, doses from radiation therapy to treat cancer may be high enough to cause 
some ARS symptoms), 
•  The radiation was penetrating (that is, able to reach internal organs), 
•  The person’s entire body, or most of it, received the dose, and 
•  The radiation was received in a short time, usually within minutes. 

 
The first symptoms of ARS typically are nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea. These symptoms will start within 
minutes to days after the exposure, will last for minutes up to several days, and may come and go. Then 
the person usually looks and feels healthy for a short time, after which he or she will become sick again 
with loss of appetite, fatigue, fever, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and possibly even seizures and coma. 
This seriously ill stage may last from a few hours up to several months. 
 
People with ARS typically also have some skin damage. This damage can start to show within a few hours 
after exposure and can include swelling, itching, and redness of the skin (like a bad sunburn). There also 
can be hair loss. As with the other symptoms, the skin may heal for a short time, followed by the return of 
swelling, itching, and redness days or weeks later. Complete healing of the skin may take from several 
weeks up to a few years depending on the radiation dose the person’s skin received. 
 
The chance of survival for people with ARS decreases with increasing radiation dose. Most people who do 
not recover from ARS will die within several months of exposure. The cause of death in most cases is the 
destruction of the person’s bone marrow, which results in infections and internal bleeding. For the 
survivors, the recovery process may last from several weeks up to 2 years. 
 
If a radiation emergency occurs that exposes people to high doses of radiation in a short period of time, 
they should immediately seek medical care from their doctor or local hospital. 
 
 
More Information 
For more information about radiation and emergency response, see the Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention’s Emergency Preparedness and Response website at www.bt.cdc.gov or contact the following 
organizations: 
 

•  The CDC Public Response Source at 1-888-246-2675 
•  Conference of Radiation Control Program Directors (CRCPD) at www.crcpd.org or 502-227-
4543 

Reviewed and updated 

May 20, 2005 

Page 1 of 2 

 

Acute Radiation Syndrome 
(continued from previous page) 
 

•  U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) at www.epa.gov/radiation/rert 
•  Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) at www.nrc.gov or 301-415-8200 
•  Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) at www.fema.gov or 202-646-4600 
•  Radiation Emergency Assistance Center/Training Site (REAC/TS) at www.orau.gov/reacts or 
865-576-3131 
•  U.S. National Response Team (NRT) at www.nrt.org 
•  U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) at www.energy.gov or 1-800-dial-DOE 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

For more information, visit www.bt.cdc.gov/radiation, 
or call CDC at 800-CDC-INFO (English and Spanish) or 888-232-6348 (TTY). 
Reviewed and updated 
May 20, 2005 

Page 2 of 2 

 

