Td or Tdap Vaccine
What You Need to Know

(Tetanus and 
Diphtheria or  
Tetanus, Diphtheria 
and Pertussis)

Many Vaccine Information Statements are 
available in Spanish and other languages.  
See www.immunize.org/vis
Hojas de Informacián Sobre Vacunas están 
disponibles en Español y en muchos otros 
idiomas. Visite www.immunize.org/vis

  1  Why get vaccinated?
Tetanus, diphtheria and pertussis can be very serious diseases. 
TETANUS (Lockjaw) causes painful muscle spasms and 
stiffness, usually all over the body.
•	 It can lead to tightening of muscles in the head and neck so the 
victim cannot open his mouth or swallow, or sometimes even 
breathe. Tetanus kills about 1 out of 5 people who are infected.
DIPHTHERIA can cause a thick membrane to cover the back of 
the throat.
•	 It can lead to breathing problems, paralysis, heart failure, and 
even death.
PERTUSSIS (Whooping Cough) causes severe coughing spells 
which	can	lead	to	difficulty	breathing,	vomiting,	and	disturbed	
sleep.
•	 It can lead to weight loss, incontinence, rib fractures and 
passing out from violent coughing. Up to 2 in 100 adolescents 
and 5 in 100 adults with pertussis are hospitalized or have 
complications, including pneumonia and death. 
These three diseases are all caused by bacteria. Diphtheria and 
pertussis are spread from person to person. Tetanus enters the 
body through cuts, scratches, or wounds.
The United States saw as many as 200,000 cases a year of 
diphtheria and pertussis before vaccines were available, and 
hundreds of cases of tetanus. Since then, tetanus and diphtheria 
cases have dropped by about 99% and pertussis cases by about 
92%.
Children 6 years of age and younger get DTaP vaccine to protect 
them from these three diseases. But older children, adolescents, 
and adults need protection too.
  2 
 Vaccines for adolescents and 
adults: Td and Tdap
Two vaccines are available to protect people 7 years of age and 
older from these diseases:
•	 Td vaccine has been used for many years. It protects against 
tetanus and diphtheria.
•	 Tdap vaccine was	licensed	in	2005.	It	is	the	first	vaccine	for	
adolescents and adults that protects against pertussis as well as 
tetanus and diphtheria.
A Td booster dose is recommended every 10 years. Tdap is given 
only once.

  3  Which vaccine, and when?
Ages 7 through 18 years
•	 A dose of Tdap is recommended at age 11 or 12. This dose 
could be given as early as age 7 for children who missed one or 
more childhood doses of DTaP.
•	 Children and adolescents who did not get a complete series 
of DTaP shots by age 7 should complete the series using a 
combination of Td and Tdap.
Age 19 years and older
•	 All adults should get a booster dose of Td every 10 years. 
Adults under 65 who have never gotten Tdap should get a dose 
of Tdap as their next booster dose. Adults 65 and older may get 
one booster dose of Tdap.
•	 Adults (including women who may become pregnant and 
adults 65 and older) who expect to have close contact with a 
baby younger than 12 months of age should get a dose of Tdap 
to help protect the baby from pertussis. 
•	 Healthcare professionals who have direct patient contact in 
hospitals or clinics should get one dose of Tdap. 
Protection after a wound
•	 A person who gets a severe cut or burn might need a dose of Td 
or Tdap to prevent tetanus infection. Tdap should be used for 
anyone who has never had a dose previously. Td should be used 
if Tdap is not available, or for:
 - anybody who has already had a dose of Tdap,
 - children 7 through 9 years of age who completed the  
childhood DTaP series, or
 - adults 65 and older.
Pregnant women
•	 Pregnant women who have never had a dose of Tdap should get 
one, after the 20th week of gestation and preferably during the 
3rd trimester. If they do not get Tdap during their pregnancy 
they should get a dose as soon as possible after delivery. 
Pregnant women who have previously received Tdap and need 
tetanus or diphtheria vaccine while pregnant should get Td.
Tdap or Td may be given at the same time as other vaccines.
 Some people should not be 
  4 
vaccinated or should wait.
•	 Anyone who has had a life-threatening allergic reaction after a 
dose of any tetanus, diphtheria, or pertussis containing vaccine 
should not get Td or Tdap.
•	 Anyone who has a severe allergy to any component of a 
vaccine should not get that vaccine. Tell your doctor if the 
person getting the vaccine has any severe allergies.
•	 Anyone who had a coma, or long or multiple seizures within 7 
days after a dose of DTP or DTaP should not get Tdap, unless a 

VACCINE INFORMATION STATEMENTcause other than the vaccine was found. These people may get 
Td.
•	 Talk to your doctor if the person getting either vaccine:
- has epilepsy or another nervous system problem,
- had severe swelling or severe pain after a previous dose of  
DTP, DTaP, DT, Td, or Tdap vaccine, or
- has had Guillain-Barré Syndrome (GBS).
Anyone who has a moderate or severe illness on the day the shot 
is scheduled should usually wait until they recover before getting 
Tdap or Td vaccine. A person with a mild illness or low fever can 
usually be vaccinated.
 What are the risks from Tdap  
  5 
and Td vaccines?
With a vaccine, as with any medicine, there is always a small risk 
of a life-threatening allergic reaction or other serious problem.
Brief fainting spells and related symptoms (such as jerking 
movements) can happen after any medical procedure, including 
vaccination. Sitting or lying down for about 15 minutes after a 
vaccination can help prevent fainting and injuries caused by falls. 
Tell your doctor if the patient feels dizzy or light-headed, or has 
vision changes or ringing in the ears.
Getting tetanus, diphtheria or pertussis disease would be much 
more likely to lead to severe problems than getting either Td or 
Tdap vaccine. 
Problems reported after Td and Tdap vaccines are listed below. 
Mild problems
(Noticeable, but did not interfere with activities)
Tdap
•	 Pain (about 3 in 4 adolescents and 2 in 3 adults)
•	 Redness or swelling at the injection site (about 1 in 5)
•	 Mild fever of at least 100.4°F (up to about 1 in 25 adolescents 
and 1 in 100 adults)
•	 Headache (about 4 in 10 adolescents and 3 in 10 adults)
•	 Tiredness (about 1 in 3 adolescents and 1 in 4 adults)
•	 Nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, stomach ache (up to 1 in 4 
adolescents and 1 in 10 adults)
•	 Chills, body aches, sore joints, rash, swollen glands 
(uncommon)
Td
•	 Pain (up to about 8 in 10)
•	 Redness or swelling at the injection site (up to about 1 in 3)
•	 Mild fever (up to about 1 in 15)
•	 Headache or tiredness (uncommon)
Moderate problems
(Interfered with activities, but did not require medical attention)
Tdap
•	 Pain at the injection site (about 1 in 20 adolescents and 1 in 100 
adults) 
•	 Redness or swelling at the injection site (up to about 1 in 
16 adolescents and 1in 25 adults)
•	 Fever over 102°F (about 1 in 100 adolescents and 1 in 250 
adults)
•	 Headache (1 in 300)
•	 Nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, stomach ache (up to 3 in 
100 adolescents and 1 in 100 adults)
Td
•	 Fever over 102°F (rare)

Tdap or Td
•	 Extensive swelling of the arm where the shot was given (up to 
about 3 in 100).
Severe problems
(Unable to perform usual activities; required medical attention)
Tdap or Td
•	 Swelling, severe pain, bleeding and redness in the arm where 
the shot was given (rare).
A severe allergic reaction could occur after any vaccine. They are 
estimated to occur less than once in a million doses.
  6 
 What if there is a serious 
reaction?
What should I look for?
•	 Look for anything that concerns you, such as signs of a severe 
allergic reaction, very high fever, or behavior changes. 
 
Signs of a severe allergic reaction can include hives, swelling 
of	the	face	and	throat,	difficulty	breathing,	a	fast	heartbeat,	
dizziness, and weakness. These would start a few minutes to a 
few hours after the vaccination.
What should I do?
•	 If you think it is a severe allergic reaction or other emergency 
that can’t wait, call 9-1-1 or get the person to the nearest 
hospital. Otherwise, call your doctor.
•	 Afterward, the reaction should be reported to the Vaccine 
Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS). Your doctor might 
file	this	report,	or	you	can	do	it	yourself	through	the	VAERS	
web site at www.vaers.hhs.gov, or by  
calling 1-800-822-7967.
VAERS is only for reporting reactions. They do not give medical 
advice.
 The National Vaccine Injury 
  7 
Compensation Program
The National Vaccine Injury Compensation Program (VICP) is a 
federal program that was created to compensate people who may 
have been injured by certain vaccines.
Persons who believe they may have been injured by a vaccine  
can	learn	about	the	program	and	about	filing	a	claim	by	calling	
1-800-338-2382 or visiting the VICP website at  
www.hrsa.gov/vaccinecompensation.
  8  How can I learn more?
•	 Ask your doctor.
•	 Call your local or state health department.
•	 Contact the Centers for Disease Control and  
Prevention (CDC): 
- Call 1-800-232-4636 (1-800-CDC-INFO) or 
- Visit CDC’s website at www.cdc.gov/vaccines

  Vaccine Information Statement (Interim)
 Td and Tdap Vaccines
Office Use Only
1/24/2012
  42 U.S.C. § 300aa-26

