 
FACT SHEET 
 
A n t h r a x :  W h a t  Y o u  N e e d   T o  K n ow  
 
What Is Anthrax? 
Anthrax is a serious disease caused by Bacillus anthracis, a bacterium that forms spores. A bacterium is 
a very small organism made up of one cell. Many bacteria can cause disease. A spore is a cell that is 
dormant (asleep) but may come to life with the right conditions. 
 
There are three types of anthrax: 
•  skin (cutaneous) 
• 
lungs (inhalation) 
•  digestive (gastrointestinal) 

 

 
How Do You Get It? 
Anthrax is not known to spread from one person to another. 
 
Anthrax from animals. Humans can become infected with anthrax by handling products from infected 
animals or by breathing in anthrax spores from infected animal products (like wool, for example). People 
also can become infected with gastrointestinal anthrax by eating undercooked meat from infected animals. 
 
Anthrax as a weapon. Anthrax also can be used as a weapon. This happened in the United States in 
2001. Anthrax was deliberately spread through the postal system by sending letters with powder 
containing anthrax. This caused 22 cases of anthrax infection. 
 
How Dangerous Is Anthrax? 
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention classifies agents with recognized bioterrorism potential 
into three priority areas (A, B and C). Anthrax is classified as a Category A agent. Category A agents are 
those that: 
•  pose the greatest possible threat for a bad effect on public health 
•  may spread across a large area or need public awareness 
•  need a great deal of planning to protect the public’s health 

 
In most cases, early treatment with antibiotics can cure cutaneous anthrax. Even if untreated, 80 percent 
of people who become infected with cutaneous anthrax do not die. Gastrointestinal anthrax is more 
serious because between one-fourth and more than half of cases lead to death. Inhalation anthrax is much 
more severe. In 2001, about half of the cases of inhalation anthrax ended in death. 
 
What Are the Symptoms? 
The symptoms (warning signs) of anthrax are different depending on the type of the disease: 
 

•  Cutaneous: The first symptom is a small sore that develops into a blister. The blister then develops 
into a skin ulcer with a black area in the center. The sore, blister and ulcer do not hurt. 
•  Gastrointestinal: The first symptoms are nausea, loss of appetite, bloody diarrhea, and fever, 
followed by bad stomach pain. 

 

July 31, 2003 

Page 1 of 2 

 

Anthrax: What You Need To Know 
(continued from previous page) 
 

• 

Inhalation: The first symptoms of inhalation anthrax are like cold or flu symptoms and can include 
a sore throat, mild fever and muscle aches. Later symptoms include cough, chest discomfort, 
shortness of breath, tiredness and muscle aches. (Caution: Do not assume that just because a 
person has cold or flu symptoms that they have inhalation anthrax.) 

 
How Soon Do Infected People Get Sick? 
Symptoms can appear within 7 days of coming in contact with the bacterium for all three types of anthrax. 
For inhalation anthrax, symptoms can appear within a week or can take up to 42 days to appear. 
 
How Is Anthrax Treated? 
Antibiotics are used to treat all three types of anthrax. Early identification and treatment are important. 
 
Prevention after exposure. Treatment is different for a person who is exposed to anthrax, but is not yet 
sick. Health-care providers will use antibiotics (such as ciprofloxacin, levofloxacin, doxycycline, or 
penicillin) combined with the anthrax vaccine to prevent anthrax infection. 
 
Treatment after infection. Treatment is usually a 60-day course of antibiotics. Success depends on the 
type of anthrax and how soon treatment begins. 
 
Can Anthrax Be Prevented? 
Vaccination. There is a vaccine to prevent anthrax, but it is not yet available for the general public. 
Anyone who may be exposed to anthrax, including certain members of the U.S. armed forces, laboratory 
workers, and workers who may enter or re-enter contaminated areas, may get the vaccine. Also, in the 
event of an attack using anthrax as a weapon, people exposed would get the vaccine. 
 
What Should I Do if I Think I Have Anthrax? 
If you are showing symptoms of anthrax infection, call your health-care provider right away. 
 
What Should I Do if I Think I Have Been Exposed to Anthrax? 
Contact local law enforcement immediately if you think that you may have been exposed to anthrax. This 
includes being exposed to a suspicious package or envelope that contains powder. 
 
What Is CDC Doing To Prepare For a Possible Anthrax Attack? 
CDC is working with state and local health authorities to prepare for an anthrax attack. Activities include: 
•  Developing plans and procedures to respond to an attack using anthrax. 
•  Training and equipping emergency response teams to help state and local governments control 
infection, gather samples, and perform tests. Educating health-care providers, media, and the 
general public about what to do in the event of an attack. 
•  Working closely with health departments, veterinarians, and laboratories to watch for suspected 
cases of anthrax. Developing a national electronic database to track potential cases of anthrax. 
•  Ensuring that there are enough safe laboratories for quickly testing of suspected anthrax cases. 
•  Working with hospitals, laboratories, emergency response teams, and health-care providers to 
make sure they have the supplies they need in case of an attack. 

 
 
 
 
 

 

For more information, visit www.bt.cdc.gov/agent/anthrax, 
or call CDC at 800-CDC-INFO (English and Spanish) or 888-232-6348 (TTY). 

July 31, 2003 

Page 2 of 2 

 

