Teen Health: 
Prescription Drug Abuse 
It’s a good idea for parents to talk to their children about the dangers of 
abusing prescription drugs. Prescription drugs are medicines given by a 
doctor. Teens abuse prescription drugs more than most street drugs. Often 
teens get prescription drugs from family or friends, with or without their  
knowledge. They think these drugs are safe, because they have medical 
uses. Teens may think these drugs help them feel better, fit in, lose weight, 
or do better in school.
Drugs most often misused by teens include pain relievers (Vicodin, Oxy-
Contin, Percocet, Codeine), sedatives (Valium, Xanax, Ambien, Mebaral, 
Nembutal), and stimulants (Ritalin, Adderall). Teens may also use over-
the-counter medicines like cough syrup and cold medicines to get high.

The Dangers
Prescription drugs can be as addictive and harmful as street drugs. Large 
amounts can slow down breathing and affect your heartbeat. They can be 
deadly if used to excess or mixed with other medicines or drugs.  

Prevention: Stay Involved in Your Child’s Life
g Talk to your teen about the risks of drugs. 
g Help your child find healthy ways to deal with stress.  
g  Know the signs that your teen may be using drugs. For example, your 
child has lost interest in friends and normal activities. You may also 
notice changes in his or her appearance, school performance, or eating 
and sleeping habits. 

Avoid Easy Access to Pills 
g  Keep all medicines in a cool, dry place out of your child’s reach.   
g  Keep track of the number of pills you have. Throw out old or unused 
pills.   
g  Talk to family, friends, and other parents about preventing easy access.  

What Can You Do If You Think Your Teen Is Abusing Prescription Drugs? 
g  Talk to your child when he or she is not high and when you are calm. 
g Get help from your child’s doctor or school counselor.
g  Get more information on drug abuse. Call the Substance Abuse &
Mental Health Services Administration at 1-800-662-HELP (4357).
If you have questions or concerns about your teen’s coverage for 
substance abuse treatment, please call your teen’s health plan.

©2009 L.A. Care Health Plan. Developed by L.A. Care Health Plan working in collaboration with our contracted health plan partners, Anthem Blue Cross, Care1st 
Health Plan, Community Health Plan, and Kaiser Permanente. Together we provide Medi-Cal managed care services in Los Angeles County.   RHE503 (2/09)

